# Doomclaws

A major problem with big tech is that its business model is reliant on what I
call _doomclaws_. A doomclaw is one of the many tricks that modern media uses
to manipulate your emotions, grab your attention, and pull you into
_doomscrolling_ â€” i.e. consuming more content, or staying on the website
longer.

Tech companies and media-makers have discovered a huge variety of doomclaws,
but the basic mechanism is:

- Grab your attention, most often with something that's emotionally charged.
- Make you feel uncertainty, incompleteness, or tension, which will pull you
  into scrolling or clicking.

A simple example of a doomclaw is the _clickbait headline_. An ideal clickbait
headline, from the perspective of the media mogul, is astonishing, scary, and
missing crucial details. Surprise and fear get your attention. Novelty and
disbelief make you curious. The lack of detail makes you more likely to click
through.

Doomclaws are not the same thing as clickbait though; they are a more general
concept. Doomclaws can be found even in places where there's nothing to click
on. They can be a simple as an audio compression technique that makes a
podcaster's voice sound louder (have you noticed how certain YouTubers always
sound like they're shouting? It's very odd.) Another common type of doomclaw is
the turn of phrase that's emotionally provocative but not actually meaningful.
When an article starts with "In today's complex world..." it's trying to make
you feel uncertain and anxious right off the bat.

Again, the purpose of these techniques is to make you feel perpetually
dissatisfied and anxious, so you'll keep clicking and scrolling. The media
companies call this "engagement". I call it emotional manipulation.

## Physical signs

If you can stay aware of your body while browsing the web, it's fairly easy to
notice when you've been hooked by a doomclaw. You'll feel a kind of tension in
your chest and arms, or around your head and face. After you stop browsing, you
might feel foggy-brained, or like you can't focus on anything. Your thoughts
might keep returning to whatever you were just reading or watching.

If you notice any of these signs, it's probably a good idea to switch to your
[harmless default activity] and maybe [block the website you were just on].

[harmless default activity]: but-what-am-i-gonna-do.md
[block the website you were just on]: leechblock.md

## Dependent origination

Buddhism has a name for the process by which doomclaws ruin your day:
_dependent origination_. At the risk of oversimplifying, Buddhist
_enlightenment_ is the state you reach when you've permanently broken free of
doomclaws and they have no power over you anymore.
